well you're taking a cool dip in the sea
late one summer evening
when out of nowhere the water starts
glowing
you're not in some fantastical dream and
this is no time to stop and enjoy the
beauty
get out of there now because you're not
alone
you look at a map and clearly see bodies
of water are supposed to be blue
though when you scoop up some in a glass
any water if it's clean
is mostly clear so how is that
well you probably recall learning about
roy g biv
in school the colors of the visible
light spectrum you can clearly see in
rainbows
well ponds rivers lakes and oceans look
blue
because all that water spread over a
large enough surface area
will absorb the red part of the light
spectrum what's left to reflect off the
surface
and beeline straight into our eyes cool
tones of blue some greens
and purples
but under the right circumstances some
bodies of water can break all those laws
of physics
and what we've accepted as reality like
australia's
gippsland lakes which glow electric blue
at night
the waves light up as they break into
the shore and
it's breathtaking to see against a black
starry sky
but get rid of the romance switch to day
mode and look again
the water is a rusty red orange
it's called a red tide it happens
because of a type of single-celled
organism called dinoflagellates
also known as sea sparkles or red algae
unusually large blooms of them can grow
when temperatures are a bit higher
the seas are calm and there are more
nutrients in the water
often after a storm or natural
catastrophe
you see big blotches of red in the water
during the day
but at night they light up like a lava
lamp
this happens because organisms glow when
they're stressed or disturbed
scientists think this evolutionary trick
helps the algae scare off enemies
or attract the things that eat their
predators
waves moving in the water can trigger
the chemical reaction in them
that makes them light up but
don't try for yourself by swimming in a
patch of sea sparkles
red algae can be hazardous to people and
marine life
for one they contain high levels of
ammonia
so a peaceful swim in glowing waters can
mean eye irritation and
rash they can also make the surrounding
air
difficult to breathe what's worse fish
and marine mammals that dine on them
may find themselves having their last
meal they make seafood toxic
so eating something that ate red algae
can bring about symptoms like
food poisoning in people in rare cases
it can even affect the central nervous
system
causing tingling loss of motor control
or even respiratory paralysis
yeah you probably want to avoid that
sometimes a glowing danger can sneak up
on you in perfectly blue waters
crystal jellies live off the north
american coast of the pacific ocean
and glow purplish blue and green and an
unexpected rendezvous with these
bioluminescent beauties
can bring you nothing but a big red
itchy rash
the good news is that its sting isn't
that painful
now no need to pinch yourself that
bubble gum pink lake
is real and it's not the only one in the
world
but australia's lake hillier is the most
mysterious
the water is extremely salty there but
some microorganisms still manage
to thrive salt loving algae and pink
bacteria
are what give the lake its unearthly
look
what makes it so unique among all the
world's pink salt lakes
is that when you scoop the water up in a
glass it doesn't
lose the color it's actually safe to
swim in though
you couldn't if you wanted to it's
closed off from the public
plus the saltiness would dry your skin
out and irritate it
and this is no strawberry milkshake so
don't even
think about drinking it it's 10 times
saltier than the sea
and drinking ocean water is dangerous
enough
the crater lake on kawa egen an active
volcano in java
will astound you with its turquoise
water
well if you can call it water this thing
is a lake of sulfuric acid
now a quick recap of the ph scale
towards zero is acidic
like lemons 7 is neutral pure water and
alkalines are closer to 14
think bleach and drain cleaner the water
in this lake
has a ph of less than 0.3 making it a
hair less acidic than
battery acid keep your distance while
enjoying the beauty
and just wait until the real show starts
at night
the volcano spews electric blue lava
technically it's the sulfuric gases
catching on fire from the lava
and being exposed to oxygen
yellowstone has blue lava too but it's
also
where you'll find the grand prismatic
spring
the thing looks like a melted rainbow
the center is the hottest part
no color changing bacteria can live
there so it reflects typical blue
now around that is a band of yellow the
water there is farther from the heat
center
so it allows for bacteria that produce
carotenoids as a type of natural
sunscreen
this pigment chemical is actually orange
it's what gives carrots their hue by the
way
but the green colored bacteria make it
look a bit yellowish
the next ring is orange the water there
is somewhat cooler
and it houses four different types of
microorganisms
that make the water bright orange rusty
red orange
and even brown boiling lake in dominica
could probably cook an egg the bubbling
water is grayish blue
and hides under a huge vapor cloud
the average temperature near the shore
is between 180 and 197 degrees
fahrenheit
in the center it's still unknown no
one's measured the temperature there
because the water's
always boiling it's also hard to breathe
out there
because of volcanic sulfur gases
new zealand's frying pan lake will make
your eyes water for several reasons
first you'll be astonished by its
majestic beauty
but that's not a fairy tale mist
floating above the surface
it's hazardous vapors that'll really get
the tears flowing
it's the world's largest hot spring and
is a bit less acidic than a lemon
the water is about 130 degrees and you
could feel its heat from a football
field away
but that's not enough to cause these
bubbles you see no
this lake's not boiling that's carbon
dioxide and hydrogen
sulfide gas is bubbling up and breaking
through the surface
so what you have is a massive nine acre
steaming cauldron spewing poisonous
fumes
you can safely assume it's no place for
swimming
out of this world colors caused by toxic
microorganisms
steaming and boiling volcanic lakes most
dangerous waters will clearly let you
know
to keep your distance except for rip
tides
a riptide is a water current that
carries you far away from the shore
and they can happen unexpectedly
if you ever get caught in one stay calm
and swim
parallel to the beach to break free from
it and know what to look for to avoid
them
you can sometimes see a darker calm
section between the white cats of
breaking waves
rip currents can also pull debris like
algae seaweed and sand
quickly away from the shore while the
surrounding waves usually bring them
toward it
hey let's be careful out there